# A Guide To Home-Scale Worm Ranching

*Randall Schwager*

## Introduction

Vermiculture, also known as worm ranching or worm composting, is an
alternative method of composting food waste and waste paper at
home. Vermiculture takes up less space than traditional composting and
can operate year-round. This handbook describes a low-tech method for
vermiculture at home. I've followed this method since 2018 and it has
reduced our food waste to landfill by 90% and paper waste by 75%. 

## The Three Rules

The method is essentially three rules:

  1. Supply a flow of food and bedding in, and waste out
  
  2. Maintain a proper temperature
  
  3. Control moisture levels
  
Following the three rules above, combined with the bin setup described
below, has served my and other Denver-area families dependably since
2018.

## Bin Setup

We use shallow storage totes as worm bins. Rubbermaid makes a 10
gallon polyethylene storage tote under the Roughneck brand; it's
served the purpose well. Specifically:

  * The tote is more wide and long than it is deep.

  * The tote is completely opaque: no light infiltrates through the plastic.
  
  * The tote has a secure, snap-fitting lid.

  * The tote is affordable and easy to find at major retailers.
  
  * The tote is rugged enough to hold 40 pounds.
  
Other containers that satisfy the above criteria will also work well.

The bins should be ventilated using a 3/16" drill bit with roughly one
hole per square inch. Start with fewer holes on the lid than you think
you need. If the bin gets too wet you can add more holes later. Also
drill four 3/16" holes in the bottom-most parts of the tote to allow
for excees moisture drainage. Finally, the bins should be wrapped in
an old sheet or pillowcase. In our setup, our bins are stacked on
shelves and elevated off the shelf surface with two bricks. We then
wrap the shelf in an old king-size sheet and secure the sheet with
three clothespins.

The red wiggler earthworms we use are most active in the top four-inch
layer of substrate, so deeper totes just take up more space without
providing any extra worm capacity. Home Depot used to sell a tote with
a roughly 10 gallon capacity, but with it was more shallow, wider, and
longer. Compared to the Roughneck tote, the Home Depot tote holds more
worms for the same weight. 

Earthworms are sensitive to light. Bright light causes paralysis. Too
much bright light will kill worms. The tote should have a secure lid
to control moisture and keep the living contents of the bin in the
bin. During times of neglect, the bin can get heavy with accumulated
castings, so a rugged tote is important. Nobody wants a bin to fail
and spill several dozen pounds of composting ecosystem in their
basement. As described in the section about commensal organisms, the
bin can develop fungus gnats. We wrap the shelves in a bedsheet to
keep the gnat level in the rest of the house to a satisfactory level,
while maintaining adequate ventilation inside the bin.

## Substrate Flow

Our worms eat our kitchen waste and waste paper products. The food
waste provides nutrients for the worms to eat, while the paper
products provide a medium to live in. Microorganisms (bacteria and
fungi) break down the food, and the worms eat the microorganisms. The
worms chew off and digest pieces of bedding and food as they migrate
around the bin. 

After digestion, the worms poop out worm castings. Castings are the
size, texture, and color of chocolate cake crumbs. Castings retain
moisture well; each grain is wrapped in a layer of mucus. The castings
have an inoffensive and earth-like odor. 

It's important to maintain a flow of substrate. If castings or waste
accumulates for months on the bottom of the bin, salts can build up
and create an inhospitable environment for the worms. Thus, the
feeding procedure describes completely clearing one side of the bin,
moving the unfinished compost to the other side of the bin when
necessary. Keep an eye for white salt deposits on the side of the
bin. If excess salt does form, consider moving the worms to a fresh
bin, then washing out the old bin.

### Food and Bedding

We keep a glass three-quart casserole dish on our kitchen
counter. Over several days, we fill the dish up with vegetable scraps,
fruit rinds, uneaten meals, and dinner plate scrapings. When full or
starting to decompose, we microwave the dish for 5 to 6 minutes, allow
to cool, then perform the feeding procedure. After the dish is
emptied, we wash it in the dishwasher, then repeat the accumulation
and microwaving process. 

Heating the worm food is an optional optimization. The worms eat raw
food with no issues, but "cooked" food is consumed faster and I'm less
worried about introducing a pest into the bin.

Almost all food is acceptable. Avoid foods that could alter the pH of
the bin: citrus and large amounts of peach or apple puree. Also avoid
foods that are difficult to break down: fruit pits, avocado peels,
bones, and large pieces of meat or cartilage. 

The best bedding I've found is corrugated paper board (aka cardboard)
passed through a crosscut paper shredder. The shreds have structure
enough to retain air pockets even when moist. Uncoated copy paper,
shredded with a crosscut shredder, is almost as good as
cardboard. Since we get a fair amount of junk mail and other waste
paper, our bedding of choice is a 50/50 mix of shredded cardboard and
waste paper.

Avoid large quantities of newspaper: when moist, newspaper joins
together into a thick paste. The worms have difficulty breathing in
the thick newpaper stew. I also avoid coated paper as a matter of
principal. It's not always clear what the coating is, and I'd prefer
not embark on an adventure in worm-plastic interaction.

### Feeding procedure

We feed a bin every four to seven days. When it's time to feed a bin,
we head downstairs and choose the hungriest bin. The hungriest bin is
often the bin that was fed longest ago, but occasionally one bin is
more active than another. With the bin chosen, we head outside, remove
the sheet, and open the bin. Let the bin air out for a few minutes to
let the worms flee to the bottom of the bin and let any gnats escape. 

Next, mentally divide the bin in half. Choose the half which looks
most finished. Using your hands (glove up if you're squeamish), gently
rake the moist bedding to one corner of the unfinished half of the
bin. Then, also using your hands, gently scoop off small layers of
finished worm castings off the top of the finished half of the bin and
reserve the castings for later processing. Work methodically from one
side of the chosen half-bin to the other. After the first pass, the
worms will flee the light. Continue making scooping passes until you
reach the bottom of the bin or until the top no longer looks like
finished worm castings. Finally, use your hands like a spatula and
lift off the rest of the contents and place it on top of the
un-finished half of the bin. The action is like sliding a cheeseburger
off of the spatula onto a bun; no flipping!

With a section of the bin now clear, grab a handful of dry, fresh
bedding and lay it down in a fully layer one or two inches thick. Then
dump the worm food on top of the fresh bedding. Spread out the worm
food into a two or three inch thick layer. Try to keep the food
together: if there's not enough food to cover the entire layer of
bedding in a solid layer of worm food, make a shorter and narrower
layer of food but keep the thickness at two or three inches.

Finally, rake the moist bedding from earlier ontop of the worm
food. Supplement with fresh shreds to keep the layer of food under the
bedding. Close up the bin, put it back on the shelf, and re-wrap the
shelves in the sheet. As for the harvested castings, they can be mixed
as-is into soil as fertilizer and soil amendment. Alternatively, the
castings can be sifted with a quarter-inch hardware cloth and used a
seed starting medium or sold.

## Moisture Control

Earthworms need moist bedding to do their wormy business. The bedding
acts as both their home and their fiber supplement. The goal is to
keep the bedding as moist as a wrung-out sponge. The bedding is too
wet when there are no air pockets in the bedding; pools of liquid or a
consistency similar to oatmeal is too wet. If the bin gets too wet,
add fresh bedding below the affected area.

The bedding is too dry when a moist object sticks to the bedding. It's
rare to get too dry. The feeding procedure described above should add
sufficient moisture to the bins by virtue of the wet worm food. When
starting a bin from scratch, it's possible to find dry conditions. To
safely increase moisture, follow the following procedure: submerge a
handful of bedding into clean water, squeeze the bedding to wring out
excess moisture, then mix 3 parts of this moist bedding with one part
dry bedding and add to the bin as needed.

## Temperature Control

The bins should ideally be kept in the range of 60 to 70 degrees
Fahrenheit. Red wiggler earthworms will start to go dormant below 55
degrees. The worms will not tolerate temperatures above 80 degrees.

Keep the worms inside. The indoors are at a comfortable temperature,
bug and animal free, and dry. This avoids temperature control issues,
but also avoids pest and moisture issues.

Perhaps unsurprisingly, the best place I've found to keep worms is in
an underground basement. In Denver at three feet or more below ground
level, the winter low rarely drops below 55 degrees and the summer
high never exceeded 75 degrees.


## What Is That In My Bin?

The worm bin has an ecology of sorts. Microorganisms like fungi and
bacteria proliferate rapidly in the nutrient and oxygen rich
environment of the bin. The worms rely on these microorganisms to
break down the food, then eat the microorganisms along with the broken
down food. 

Commensal organisms consume the worm food alongside the worms.
Commonly found in the worm bin are small, white, thread-like worms
roughly a half-inch long. These white worms, also known as pot worms,
are not baby earthworms. White worms tend to proliferate on
carbohydrate rich foods like bread and pasta. These white worms pose
no threat to the bin. Another commensal organism commonly found is the
fungus gnat. Fungus gnats look very much like fruit flies, with the
main difference being that these flies eat fungus. Fungus gnats pose
no threat to the bin. Finally, the bin also can contain tiny, white,
spider-like mites. In my experience, these white mites do not pose a
threat to the bin.

White worms and fungus gnats can provide feedback on the state of the
bin. The lifespan of a white worm is short, so finding some white
worms in the bin indicates a healthy amount of food availble for the
worms. Carpets of white worms indicate that the food is too rich in
carbohydrates, or that the bin has had too much food given to
it. Similarly, a proliferation of fungus gnats indicates too much food
for the bin. A large fungus gnat population can also indicate low
moisture: check for pockets of dry bedding and adjust moisture levels
accordingly.
